--- 
layout: page
title: Windows Home Server to Windows Server 2008 R2
description: Windows Home Server to Windows Server 2008 R2
funnelweb_id: 64
date: 2011-01-03 13:00:00 +11:00
tags: "whs vailfail ws08r2 buildingwhs "
comments: true
---
Recap, what does WHS offer me?
------------------------------

The draw cards of WHSv1 - in order of importance to me - were:

 - "RAID-like" drive pooling with
   DriveExtender, with share based
   replication
 - Client Backups,  
 - Dynamic DNS (&lt;yournamehere&gt;.homeserver.com),   
 - UPnP media serving

What does WS08R2 offer me?
--------------------------

Freedom. More power. More flexibility. WHS is based on WS2003 x86. The key bit is x86, meaning that the 8gb of RAM in the server was going to waste, as less than half of that was accessible.
Another sour point was the system partition was only 20gb, meaning I ran out of space very quickly after installing a service or two, and touching the "pool" meant... disaster in most cases.
Writing to WHS is always tricky, in WS08R2, I have it however I like.

For a "normal" person, WHSv1 (not v2) does a great job and should be suffice. But I'm not normal, I'm a geek. I needed more power than what was available.

Why change?
-----------

I was happy to wait out for WHSv2, until Microsoft decided to [remove Drive Extender from it][1]. Without that, there was no point waiting any longer, no point "upgrading" to it. Alternatives included Amahi (Fedora 12 based), but ultimately I needed a Windows based machine for the build *agent* (hard to build WPF or WP7 apps without Windows!). Without DriveExtender, the WHSv2 feature set is drastically reduced to client backups, dynadns, upnp serving. All of those features are incredibly easy to replicate, without having an old or weirdly crippled OS.

[DynaDNS][2] existed long before WHS, so that can be implemented in whatever flavour you like. 

UPnP is another easy one, I'm just using [Asset UPnP][3], which does a better job that WHS did in the first place.

Client Backups are a little bit trickier without getting third party software. Windows 7 includes an image based backup and restore, which creates an image of your HDD to a VHD, which you can then restore from.
As far as I know, its not a differentiatal backup, so that'll make it much slower. However, we've gotten to a point where all our important data is either online, or stored on the central server so while it is a little annoying, repaving any machine doesn't take *that* long.

To get around some of the "safety blanket" level of data security from WHS that I'm now lacking, I've gone for a two pronged approach

 - cloud backup via [CrashPlan+ Unlimited][4] (ideally I should have done this on WHS as well, but oh well)
 - batch robocopy that copies data from drives/shares I want replicated across all drives to a hidden "replicated" partition.

That batch script is fairly simple, and just triggered with TaskScheduler once a day. Each entry looks like:

    robocopy D:\<FolderToBackup> <drive>:\backups\<FolderToBackupName> /MIR /LOG+:backup.log

The important thing here is to duplicate it across as many /physical/ drives as possible - in my case to E and G drives. I'll write some basic web or desktop app to remotely manage so that to add a replicated share, its the press of a 

button, and it'll edit the script for me. For now it is just four lines and easy to maintain.
Do note that I'm using /MIR. MIR, or mirror, aims at maintaining identical directories from the base to the target - that means if you delete it from the source directory, the backups will delete it as well.

**As a bonus, I've noticed drastic speed improvements on the same hardware and significant drop in noise from HDD activity** My guess is that whatever data balancing WHS does would prematurely kill disks.


What else could I go to?
------------------------

As silly as it sounds, Windows 7 (any version but basic) could make a better home server than WHSv2, to be honest. Why? HomeGroups, PlayTo, UPnP is on out of the box, and acting as an always on WMC for TV recording/WMC Extender.


Future for my server
------------------------

As it stands, I'm pretty stoked with how well everything has turned out on the software side, but I've run into a few issues on the hardware side.
Notably, the thermal design of the case - the Antec NSK4480 - is average at best. While there is a grill for air intake at the front, there isn't room for a fan. A microATX case, with 4 hardrives and no fan intake? That makes for some toasty drives. Then there is the issue of how many drive bays there are, only one 3.5" drive bay is is free, although I could get a 5.25" bay adapter.   

Fractal Design have recently announced the [Define Mini][5], and after my experiences with the Define R2, I think I'll take a gamble on it. This solves both the air intake issue (there is room for two 120mm fans in the front!) and the amount of drive bays with 6 dedicated 3.5" bays and an included adapter.

The second problem is that I've run out of SATA ports, which really cripples the ability to add more storage. Currently I have four drives - filling the four SATA ports - but in the future I'll need to buy a PCI/e SATA expander card. I've not yet narrowed down to just a "dumb" card that doesn't do RAID (so I can leave them as individual disks), but I'm confident I'll find something when the need arises.

Edit: Migration tips!
---------------------
If you plan to do this, my recommendation is to buy a nice big new drive, partition it how you want to install your new OS (so maybe 100gb for OS, and the rest for data), then inside WHS, copy from \\yourserver\share to the new drive.

You technically can plug the drives in to any NTFS reading machine and get the data, but often you'll be left with "ghost" files - ie, I had a movie (not duplicated) that appeared on three drives, all with the same filesize... but only one of them was a real file/played back.


  [1]: http://windowsteamblog.com/windows/b/windowshomeserver/archive/2010/11/23/windows-home-server-code-name-vail-update.aspx
  [2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamic_DNS
  [3]: http://www.dbpoweramp.com/asset-upnp-dlna.htm
  [4]: http://b4.crashplan.com/consumer/compare.html92
  [5]: http://www.fractal-design.com/?view=product&category=2&prod=58
