---
layout: page
title: I quit OSS
---

> Amazingly comments are enabled on this (for now)

Last month (24th Jan) I took to taking down my Codeplex and GitHub accounts. My Codeplex account didn't actually contain anything recent, but deleting stuff off there is a nightmare - you have to contact Codeplex staff and *hope* that they'll do something about it. I tried about a year ago to do that - at least to delete some migrated/abandoned repos, but after the initial *'sure, we'll delete it for you'*, nothing happened.

I digress - I've "quit" OSS. By that I mean my involvement in all projects I've contributed to has ceased - any that I "owned" have been taken down (save one, more on that further down). Several of the apps I've released in places like the Windows Store will continue but as closed source. Free, but closed.

###So why did I quit?
There are actually many reasons, but they all boil down to the one thing - OSS 'work' had become unfun. At my heart, I'm a dev and I enjoy programming, but OSS was sucking the life out of it. I've taken up new hobbies (woodworking currently) to *escape* from OSS. That doesn't sound particularly healthy, does it?

Ultimately I looked at the situation what do I want out of OSS, and what am I getting out of it?
The answer being: 

* to code
* stress, pain, rage.

OSS is great for your job prospects? I'm a hobbyist programmer. I'm [unemployable](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_daily_persistent_headache). I have nothing to gain from sharing my code.

###More details
If you're running an OSS project that anybody else has looked at, you'll know that it isn't *just* code. 

* There is documentation - lest people get annoying and hostile,
* There is a "website" - lest people get annoying and hostile,
* There is pushing releases - because people can't compile releases themselves, that is too fucking hard

*Then* you can get to the almost code related things. There are then two major problems - issues and pull requests. Well, people are *still* the problem as at their core I have nothing against issue tracking or pull requests, but it is always people who get in the way and make things messy.

> Note, this is a generalisation, not all people are bad. Just most of them.

Issues for my primary projects came in a few varieties

* *"Help how do I do X?"* - in 80% of the cases, it was answered in the documentation that is launched *every* time you install the project. Another 10% of cases were always basic programming/framework problems - that is, not to do with the project in question.

* *"X is broken!"* - I think maybe three times I've received an actual bug report with a repro. Maybe 50% of the time if I asked for one, after a few days/weeks/month (not kidding) I'd get a response of "oh, it was my code". Another 30% of the time I'd get "whats a repro? A screenshot or something?"

* *"Broken! X! XXXX! XXXXXXX!"* - My favourite is duplicate issues. Exact wording duplicates are the best, but at one stage I had *three* identical issues all with sequential IDs. The target/end user for this project is *developers*. If they can't figure out issue tracking, what hope is there?

Pull requests are a monster like no other. [Scott Hanselman](http://www.hanselman.com/blog/YoureJustAnotherCarriageReturnLineFeedInTheWall.aspx) has noted how ridiculous receiving pull requests that are a wall of line endings are, but I have had some truly awful pull requests sent my way.

My 'favourite' was from somebody complaining that I didn't have a dotsettings file (settings file for Resharper) included in the repo, after I knocked back another one of his pull requests that changed *every single file*. He 'helpfully' submitted a pull request with a dotsettings file, but with no explanation of what settings it actually *set*. A short list (there were waaaaay more things included) included 

* Regioning the hell out of the place
* Changing all the colours in the VS IDE to his personal preferences
* Setting line wrapping to a width he liked
* **Changing the license from MS-PL to GPL, and to his company name**

Surprisingly, I rejected this PR and he wasn't overly happy. PR after PR was submitted slowly removing settings until I told him to just *stop*. He *demanded* that I provide one that I was happy with.

While an *extreme* example, not too far from the norm.

[Ilya Grigorik](http://www.igvita.com/2011/12/19/dont-push-your-pull-requests/) sums it up best in what I consider a critical article for anybody involved or wanting to get in to OSS should read - **Don't "Push" Your Pull Requests**. The comments on code reviews in that article represent what would be a wonderful PR - something I may have received half a dozen (out of hundreds) times. OSS PRs - at least to my project - are consistently

* Lacking an actual useful description, if they have one at all
* Changing the code styling - No regions in the project? No problem, I'll add them all back for you!
* Any time they're changing visuals - particularly around animations - there would be no *visual* indication of what had changed. 
* Random 'refucktoring' changing code that isn't understood as *part* of the PR to 'help'

I used to think [Linus Torvalds was a little crazy for not accepting GitHub Pull Requests](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/pull/11#issuecomment-2023618), but given my experience with OSS/GH pull requests, I'm having a hard time faulting his stance.

###OSS community thinks you owe it something
The OSS community in general seems to believe that whatever you publish online is *owed* to them. While I had dozens of projects online, only a few were popular and even then only one stood out amongst them all - [MahApps.Metro](https://github.com/mahapps/mahapps.metro). When that was gone, eventually people noticed that I was 'gone'. 

GitHub staff were offering to "help" me restore my account. I capitulated and let them restore that so ownership could transfer to [Shiftkey](http://twitter.com/shiftkey).

It isn't what I wanted, I just wanted to get rid of everything and move on with my life, but it is how it is.

###This isn't the first time you've quit...
No, but this is the final stroke for OSS for me. This time won't result in a name change or dropping my blog (the brief period it was down was while I was finding a non-GitHub webhost).

Last year I quit [Code52](http://code52.org/). Again, it was people. I was loving the project and concept but the people got to me. Trolls and haters. The OSS community bickering insane shit like semi-colons gets to you when all *I* wanted out of Code52 was to teach people. 